publications.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: Research
permalink: /publications/
---

Other places to find my work, which might be more up to date, include [the arXiv](https://arxiv.org/a/0000-0002-9347-1586.html), [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.co.uk/citations?user=UJShxDIAAAAJ), and [my ORCID page](https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9347-1586).

## Survey articles

**Pooled testing and its applications in the COVID-19 pandemic**  
M Aldridge, [D Ellis](https://sites.google.com/view/davidellismath)  
In: *Pandemics: Insurance and Social Protection*, edited by MdC Boado-Penas, J Eisenberg, Ş Şahin, Springer, 2022  
Extended version: [arXiv:2105.08845](https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.08845)  
Book chapter: [doi:10.1007/978-3-030-78334-1_11](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-78334-1_11)

**Group testing: an information theory perspective**  
M Aldridge, [O Johnson](https://people.maths.bris.ac.uk/~maotj/), [J Scarlett](https://www.comp.nus.edu.sg/~scarlett/)  
*Foundations and Trends in Communications and Information Theory*, 15:3–4, 196–392, 2019  
Paper/Book/Ebook: [doi:10.1561/0100000099](https://doi.org/10.1561/0100000099)  
Preprint: [arXiv:1902.06002](https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.06002)  

## Papers

**Small error algorithms for tropical group testing**  
V Paligadu, O Johnson, M Aldridge  
*IEEE Transactions on Information Theory*, 70:10, 7232-7250, 2024   
Paper: [doi:10.1109/TIT.2024.3445271](https://doi.org/10.1109/TIT.2024.3445271)  
Preprint: [arXiv:2309.07264](https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.07264)

**Conservative two-stage group testing in the linear regime**  
M Aldridge  
2022  
Preprint: [arXiv:2005.06617](https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.06617)

**Pooled testing to isolate infected individuals**  
M Aldridge  
*2021 55th Annual Conference on Information Sciences and Systems (CISS)*, 2021  
Paper: [doi:10.1109/CISS50987.2021.9400313](https://doi.org/10.1109/CISS50987.2021.9400313)  
Preprint: [arXiv:2107.09633](https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.09633)  
Talk: [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m-3e6OdBYZg)

**On the all-or-nothing behavior of Bernoulli group testing**  
[LV Truong](https://sites.google.com/site/truongvinhlan), M Aldridge, J Scarlett  
*IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Information Theory*, 1:3, 669--680, 2020  
Paper: [doi:10.1109/JSAIT.2020.3039790](https://doi.org/10.1109/JSAIT.2020.3039790)  
Preprint: [arXiv:2001.10137](https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.10137)

**Rates of adaptive group testing in the linear regime**  
M Aldridge  
*2019 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)*, 236--240, 2019    
Paper: [doi:10.1109/ISIT.2019.8849712](https://doi.org/10.1109/ISIT.2019.8849712)  
Preprint: [arXiv:1901.09687](https://arxiv.org/abs/1901.09687)

**Individual testing is optimal for nonadaptive group testing in the linear regime**  
M Aldridge  
*IEEE Transactions on Information Theory*, 65:4, 2058–2061, 2019    
Paper: [doi:10.1109/TIT.2018.2873136](https://doi.org/10.1109/TIT.2018.2873136)    
Preprint: [arXiv:1801.08590](https://arxiv.org/abs/1801.08590)    

**Performance of group testing algorithms with near-constant tests-per-item**  
O Johnson, M Aldridge, J Scarlett  
*IEEE Transactions on Information Theory*, 65:2, 707–723, 2019  
Paper: [doi:10.1109/TIT.2018.2861772](https://doi.org/10.1109/TIT.2018.2861772)  
Preprint: [arXiv:1612.07122](https://arxiv.org/abs/1612.07122)  

**The capacity of nonadaptive Bernoulli group testing**  
M Aldridge  
*IEEE Transactions on Information Theory*, 63:11, 7142–7148, 2017  
Paper: [doi:10.1109/TIT.2017.2748564](https://doi.org/10.1109/TIT.2017.2748564)  
Preprint: [arXiv:1511.05201](https://arxiv.org/abs/1511.05201)  

**On the optimality of some group testing algorithms**  
M Aldridge  
*2017 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory Proceedings*, 3085–3089, 2017  
Paper: [doi:10.1109/ISIT.2017.8007097](https://doi.org/10.1109/ISIT.2017.8007097)  
Preprint: [arXiv:1705.02708](https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.02708)

**Almost separable matrices**  
M Aldridge, L Baldassini, [K Gunderson](https://home.cc.umanitoba.ca/~umjohan1/)  
*Journal of Combinatorial Optimization*, 33:1, 215–236, 2017  
Paper: [doi:10.1007/s10878-015-9951-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10878-015-9951-1)  
Preprint: [arXiv:1410.1826](https://arxiv.org/abs/1410.1826)

**Improved group testing rates with constant column weight designs**  
M Aldridge, O Johnson, J Scarlett  
*2016 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory Proceedings*, 1381–1385, 2016  
Paper: [doi:10.1109/ISIT.2016.7541525](https://doi.org/10.1109/ISIT.2016.7541525)  
Preprint: [arXiv:1602.03471](https://arxiv.org/abs/1602.03471)  
(I would recommend reading "Performance of group testing algorithms with near-constant tests-per-item" above instead, which is a superset of this paper)

**Group testing algorithms: bounds and simulations**  
M Aldridge, L Baldassini, O Johnson  
*IEEE Transactions on Information Theory*, 60:6, 1–17, 2014  
Paper: [doi:10.1109/TIT.2014.2314472](https://doi.org/10.1109/TIT.2014.2314472)  
Preprint: [arXiv:1306.6428](https://arxiv.org/abs/1306.6428)

**The capacity of adaptive group testing**  
L Baldassini, O Johnson, M Aldridge  
*2013 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory Proceedings*, 2676–2680, 2013  
Paper: [doi:10.1109/ISIT.2013.6620712](https://doi.org/10.1109/ISIT.2013.6620712)  
Preprint: [arXiv:1301.7023](https://arxiv.org/abs/1301.7023)

**Delay-rate tradeoff in ergodic interference alignment**  
O Johnson, M Aldridge, and [R Piechocki](https://www.bristol.ac.uk/people/person/Robert-Piechocki-35f5f9bb-ee66-462c-8e8a-2de52e11ca81/)  
*2012 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory Proceedings*, 2626–2630, 2012  
Extended version: [arXiv:1004.0208](https://arxiv.org/abs/1004.0208)  
Conference paper: [doi:10.1109/ISIT.2012.6283994](https://doi.org/10.1109/ISIT.2012.6283994)

**Adaptive group testing as channel coding with feedback**  
M Aldridge  
*2012 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory Proceedings*, 1832–1836, 2012  
Paper: [doi:10.1109/ISIT.2012.6283596](https://doi.org/10.1109/ISIT.2012.6283596)  
Preprint: [arXiv:1203.5927](https://arxiv.org/abs/1203.5927)

**Interference alignment-based sum capacity bounds for random dense Gaussian interference networks**  
O Johnson, M Aldridge, and R Piechocki  
*IEEE Transactions on Information Theory*, 57:1, 282–290, 2011  
Paper: [doi:10.1109/TIT.2010.2090242](https://doi.org/10.1109/TIT.2010.2090242)  
Preprint: [arXiv:0907.5165](https://arxiv.org/abs/0907.5165)  

**Asymptotic sum-capacity of random Gaussian interference networks using interference alignment**  
M Aldridge, O Johnson, and R Piechocki  
*2010 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory Proceedings*, 410–414, 2010  
Paper: [doi:10.1109/ISIT.2010.5513390](https://doi.org/10.1109/ISIT.2010.5513390)  
Preprint: [arXiv:1002.0235](https://arxiv.org/abs/1002.0235) 

## PhD thesis

**Interference mitigation in large random wireless networks**  
M Aldridge  
PhD thesis, University of Bristol, 2011  
Online version: [arXiv:1109.1255](https://arxiv.org/abs/1109.1255)

Commit message:

Update publications.md add thin processes

publications.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: Research
permalink: /publications/
---

Other places to find my work, which might be more up to date, include [the arXiv](https://arxiv.org/a/0000-0002-9347-1586.html), [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.co.uk/citations?user=UJShxDIAAAAJ), and [my ORCID page](https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9347-1586).

## Survey articles

**Pooled testing and its applications in the COVID-19 pandemic**  
M Aldridge, [D Ellis](https://sites.google.com/view/davidellismath)  
In: *Pandemics: Insurance and Social Protection*, edited by MdC Boado-Penas, J Eisenberg, Ş Şahin, Springer, 2022  
Extended version: [arXiv:2105.08845](https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.08845)  
Book chapter: [doi:10.1007/978-3-030-78334-1_11](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-78334-1_11)

**Group testing: an information theory perspective**  
M Aldridge, [O Johnson](https://people.maths.bris.ac.uk/~maotj/), [J Scarlett](https://www.comp.nus.edu.sg/~scarlett/)  
*Foundations and Trends in Communications and Information Theory*, 15:3–4, 196–392, 2019  
Paper/Book/Ebook: [doi:10.1561/0100000099](https://doi.org/10.1561/0100000099)  
Preprint: [arXiv:1902.06002](https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.06002)  

## Papers

**The law of thin processes: a law of large numbers for point processes**  
M Aldridge  
2025  
Preprint: [arXiv:2502.14839](https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.14839)

**Small error algorithms for tropical group testing**  
V Paligadu, O Johnson, M Aldridge  
*IEEE Transactions on Information Theory*, 70:10, 7232-7250, 2024   
Paper: [doi:10.1109/TIT.2024.3445271](https://doi.org/10.1109/TIT.2024.3445271)  
Preprint: [arXiv:2309.07264](https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.07264)

**Conservative two-stage group testing in the linear regime**  
M Aldridge  
2022  
Preprint: [arXiv:2005.06617](https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.06617)

**Pooled testing to isolate infected individuals**  
M Aldridge  
*2021 55th Annual Conference on Information Sciences and Systems (CISS)*, 2021  
Paper: [doi:10.1109/CISS50987.2021.9400313](https://doi.org/10.1109/CISS50987.2021.9400313)  
Preprint: [arXiv:2107.09633](https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.09633)  
Talk: [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m-3e6OdBYZg)

**On the all-or-nothing behavior of Bernoulli group testing**  
[LV Truong](https://sites.google.com/site/truongvinhlan), M Aldridge, J Scarlett  
*IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Information Theory*, 1:3, 669--680, 2020  
Paper: [doi:10.1109/JSAIT.2020.3039790](https://doi.org/10.1109/JSAIT.2020.3039790)  
Preprint: [arXiv:2001.10137](https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.10137)

**Rates of adaptive group testing in the linear regime**  
M Aldridge  
*2019 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)*, 236--240, 2019    
Paper: [doi:10.1109/ISIT.2019.8849712](https://doi.org/10.1109/ISIT.2019.8849712)  
Preprint: [arXiv:1901.09687](https://arxiv.org/abs/1901.09687)

**Individual testing is optimal for nonadaptive group testing in the linear regime**  
M Aldridge  
*IEEE Transactions on Information Theory*, 65:4, 2058–2061, 2019    
Paper: [doi:10.1109/TIT.2018.2873136](https://doi.org/10.1109/TIT.2018.2873136)    
Preprint: [arXiv:1801.08590](https://arxiv.org/abs/1801.08590)    

**Performance of group testing algorithms with near-constant tests-per-item**  
O Johnson, M Aldridge, J Scarlett  
*IEEE Transactions on Information Theory*, 65:2, 707–723, 2019  
Paper: [doi:10.1109/TIT.2018.2861772](https://doi.org/10.1109/TIT.2018.2861772)  
Preprint: [arXiv:1612.07122](https://arxiv.org/abs/1612.07122)  

**The capacity of nonadaptive Bernoulli group testing**  
M Aldridge  
*IEEE Transactions on Information Theory*, 63:11, 7142–7148, 2017  
Paper: [doi:10.1109/TIT.2017.2748564](https://doi.org/10.1109/TIT.2017.2748564)  
Preprint: [arXiv:1511.05201](https://arxiv.org/abs/1511.05201)  

**On the optimality of some group testing algorithms**  
M Aldridge  
*2017 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory Proceedings*, 3085–3089, 2017  
Paper: [doi:10.1109/ISIT.2017.8007097](https://doi.org/10.1109/ISIT.2017.8007097)  
Preprint: [arXiv:1705.02708](https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.02708)

**Almost separable matrices**  
M Aldridge, L Baldassini, [K Gunderson](https://home.cc.umanitoba.ca/~umjohan1/)  
*Journal of Combinatorial Optimization*, 33:1, 215–236, 2017  
Paper: [doi:10.1007/s10878-015-9951-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10878-015-9951-1)  
Preprint: [arXiv:1410.1826](https://arxiv.org/abs/1410.1826)

**Improved group testing rates with constant column weight designs**  
M Aldridge, O Johnson, J Scarlett  
*2016 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory Proceedings*, 1381–1385, 2016  
Paper: [doi:10.1109/ISIT.2016.7541525](https://doi.org/10.1109/ISIT.2016.7541525)  
Preprint: [arXiv:1602.03471](https://arxiv.org/abs/1602.03471)  
(I would recommend reading "Performance of group testing algorithms with near-constant tests-per-item" above instead, which is a superset of this paper)

**Group testing algorithms: bounds and simulations**  
M Aldridge, L Baldassini, O Johnson  
*IEEE Transactions on Information Theory*, 60:6, 1–17, 2014  
Paper: [doi:10.1109/TIT.2014.2314472](https://doi.org/10.1109/TIT.2014.2314472)  
Preprint: [arXiv:1306.6428](https://arxiv.org/abs/1306.6428)

**The capacity of adaptive group testing**  
L Baldassini, O Johnson, M Aldridge  
*2013 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory Proceedings*, 2676–2680, 2013  
Paper: [doi:10.1109/ISIT.2013.6620712](https://doi.org/10.1109/ISIT.2013.6620712)  
Preprint: [arXiv:1301.7023](https://arxiv.org/abs/1301.7023)

**Delay-rate tradeoff in ergodic interference alignment**  
O Johnson, M Aldridge, and [R Piechocki](https://www.bristol.ac.uk/people/person/Robert-Piechocki-35f5f9bb-ee66-462c-8e8a-2de52e11ca81/)  
*2012 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory Proceedings*, 2626–2630, 2012  
Extended version: [arXiv:1004.0208](https://arxiv.org/abs/1004.0208)  
Conference paper: [doi:10.1109/ISIT.2012.6283994](https://doi.org/10.1109/ISIT.2012.6283994)

**Adaptive group testing as channel coding with feedback**  
M Aldridge  
*2012 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory Proceedings*, 1832–1836, 2012  
Paper: [doi:10.1109/ISIT.2012.6283596](https://doi.org/10.1109/ISIT.2012.6283596)  
Preprint: [arXiv:1203.5927](https://arxiv.org/abs/1203.5927)

**Interference alignment-based sum capacity bounds for random dense Gaussian interference networks**  
O Johnson, M Aldridge, and R Piechocki  
*IEEE Transactions on Information Theory*, 57:1, 282–290, 2011  
Paper: [doi:10.1109/TIT.2010.2090242](https://doi.org/10.1109/TIT.2010.2090242)  
Preprint: [arXiv:0907.5165](https://arxiv.org/abs/0907.5165)  

**Asymptotic sum-capacity of random Gaussian interference networks using interference alignment**  
M Aldridge, O Johnson, and R Piechocki  
*2010 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory Proceedings*, 410–414, 2010  
Paper: [doi:10.1109/ISIT.2010.5513390](https://doi.org/10.1109/ISIT.2010.5513390)  
Preprint: [arXiv:1002.0235](https://arxiv.org/abs/1002.0235) 

## PhD thesis

**Interference mitigation in large random wireless networks**  
M Aldridge  
PhD thesis, University of Bristol, 2011  
Online version: [arXiv:1109.1255](https://arxiv.org/abs/1109.1255)
