---
layout: post
title:  "Best of the 2000s"
date:   2009-12-29
categories: lists
permalink: /blog/best-of-2000s.html
---

### Top 10 albums

<iframe style="border-radius:12px" src="https://open.spotify.com/embed/playlist/6SCkhvYYgOixyiFHv9X9KU?utm_source=generator" width="100%" height="380" frameBorder="0" allowfullscreen="" allow="autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; fullscreen; picture-in-picture"></iframe>

**Bat for Lashes -- Two Suns**  
*Fur and Gold* was good, but this improves on it with more interesting electronics, deeper production values, and fewer lyrics about wizards.

**Björk -- Vespertine**  
Not just the best album of this decade, but the best album of any decade. Every sound is in exactly the right place. Perfect.

**Fever Ray -- Fever Ray**  
Dark and spooky.

**Imogen Heap -- Speak for Yourself**  
**Lamb -- What Sound**  
**Émilie Simon -- Végétal**  
There's an argument all three of these that goes something like "these are just bland singer--songwriter pap with the merest sprinkling of electronics over the top to trick you into thinking they're interesting". I'm not sure I have an intellectual counterargument, but I just really like these albums.

**The Knife -- Deep Cuts**  
The hipsters are putting *Silent Shout* on their lists, but I slightly prefer the slightly poppier bounciness of their previous album.

**Portishead -- Third**  
It's so good to have them back.

**Radiohead -- Kid A**  
The best album by the best band.

**Thom Yorke -- The Eraser**  
I feared that Thom's solo album might be inscrutable electronic dance-adjacent instrumentals or something, but this has real songs and real instruments (along side laptoppy percussion) and is excellent. Underrated.

***Reflections, 10 years later:** Pretty proud of this list -- these are all excellent albums I still listen to. If I were making the list now, though, I would absolutely insist on including* In Rainbows *(maybe I was limiting myself to one album per artist?) and Sufjan Stevens'* Illinois *(maybe I hadn't listened to it much?), and probably* Le Fil *by Camille too. But what could I delete to make room?*

### Top 10 films

Well, actually, I had difficulty narrowing this down, so it's actually a top 12 films.

**28 Days Later** (Danny Boyle)  
**Amélie** / *Le Fabuleux Destin d'Amélie Poulain* (Jean-Pierre Jeunet)  
**Before Sunset** (Richard Linklater)  
**Dancer in the Dark** (Lars von Trier)  
**The Edukators** / *Die fetten Jahre sind vorbei* (Hans Weingarten)  
**Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind** (Michel Gondry)  
**Frost/Nixon** (Ron Howard)  
**Hero** / 英雄 (Zhang Yimou, 2002)  
**Memento** (Christopher Nolan)  
**Mulholland Drive** (David Lynch)  
**Punch-Drunk Love** (Paul Thomas Anderson)  
**Zodiac** (David Fincher, 2007)  

***Reflections, 10 years later:** I'm baffled to read I couldn't get this down to 10, because it seems very obvious to me now that two of these --* The Edukators *and* Frost/Nixon *-- while perfectly fine films, are comfortably weaker than the other 10. But those 10 are very solid choices. Would I pick exactly the same 10 now? I could try to find space for* In the Loop *or* Lost in Translation, *say, but I could just stick with past-me.*
